[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
somebody that if you don't know your
brain is about to get melted he's
written so many best-selling books it's
insane it is the one the only robert
greene robert welcome back to the show
man
thank you for having me tom my pleasure
dude i could not be more excited you are
somebody that um the way that you think
i find so intoxicating um you talk a lot
about the things that i think people are
shy to talk about
power seduction war
the sort of underlying nature of
humanity and i am obsessed with that
topic because
to accomplish anything in your life you
have to be
in step with what is real and some of
the things that i've been hearing you
talk about now which are certainly
echoes of the books you've written um
are just you know what what's going on
right now you've referred to as a
culture of bs and that the world needs
like a nice uh slap of reality and
thought it would be really interesting
to have that conversation given the the
moment that we're living in when you
talk about like magical thinking and a
culture of bs what do you mean
well um you know we're we humans are
gifted with a form of consciousness as
far as we know it there's no other
animal on this planet that has it
perhaps on another planet there's
something similar we don't know yet
but it comes with a price
you know basically it's the same sized
brain
that was developed
through the course of evolution hundreds
of thousands of years ago
in circumstances that are completely
different from where we are now
right so evolution is a very slow
process so our brains haven't really
changed that much what has increased is
the incredible exponential explosion of
our knowledge particularly in the
sciences
and but at the same time that part of
our
consciousness our awareness lays on top
of a brain that is very primitive in
this nature i mean you know the brain is
structured in a kind of a hierarchical
manner and at the very bottom
are those most primitive layers but it's
often in cliche terms called the lizard
brain but it's very real and then
there's a kind of a mid brain that's
more you know evolutionary that's more
where our emotions come from and kind of
a connection between the the lowest part
and the highest part
anyway so we have this knowledge this
ability to think of to stand back from
our immediate circumstances and
contemplate possibilities oh i don't
have to react like an animal to this
thing happening i can step back and i
can think perhaps i could do a b or c
and as opposed to just reacting and that
is incredibly powerful it's what has
made us who we are today
but the problem with it is we don't know
how to use our brains because we still
are trapped in that very primitive model
that we have and so
we feel emotions and emotions tend to
govern so much of our thinking because
they're much more powerful than the than
the kind of weak little signals that
come from the frontal cortex
and so we're not aware of how deeply our
emotions are infecting our decisions in
our day-to-day life
and the people who know this the best
are people in marketing
because they have been studying since
the 1950s all of the amazing
psychological experiments
about how you can kind of manipulate
people how if you if you're a salesman
and you just lightly touch somebody on
the arm as a friendly gesture they're 80
more likely to buy your product right if
you use their name
all these other little tricks they've
been studying it and they know deeply
how much that emotional part of us
governs our decisions when we buy things
they call it the effective heuristic it
means that our decisions are largely
based on emotions
and the problem that we face is we're
not aware of that that was the whole
subject of the laws of human nature we
walk around thinking that we're making
decisions rationally that when we buy a
product or that when we choose a partner
to get involved with you know to marry
or whomever that we're basically basing
this
on certain kind of rational
you know protocols but we're not at all
we're infected very very deeply with
emotions and so that lack of awareness
that belief that we are rational when
we're not rational is very very
dangerous
because
answer me this time how many people do
you know
who admit to the fact that they are rash
irrational that the decision they made
in life even when that was a mistake
came from an irrational part of them
that it wasn't something that was
thought through that it wasn't something
as strategic i bet you could count them
on one hand you know and i'm as guilty
of that as the next person it's very
much part of our nature to deny the fact
that mostly we're governed by emotional
responses to the world around us
yeah the one of the things that i find
the most interesting in psychology are
the studies of people that have you know
one brain defect or another i think it
was vs ramachandran that did the study
on um i forget what the damage was to
the guy's brain but
he had no short-term memory so a doctor
would come into the room and they did
this test and they put a pin the doctor
put a pin in his hand and he shook hands
with the guy and it jabbed him and you
know the guy jerks backs like what the
hell dr leaves comes back three minutes
later goes to shake the guy's hand and
the guy won't shake his hand now
remember he has no short-term memory so
the doctor says oh why won't you shake
my hand and the guy's like well you know
i'm really uncomfortable with people in
white coats and
you know obviously he's doing it because
some part of his brain
retained the fact that when he shook
hands with this guy that it caused pain
and the the conscious mind though is
pasting over some rationalization to
explain away this weird behavior and the
fact that our minds are working so
rapidly to deliver these
socially acceptable reasons for why
we're doing something when a reality
that isn't at all why we're doing
something that gets really scary really
fast but the other thing and i've heard
you talk about this before again one of
the most interesting things i've ever
come across
where people's brains get damaged and
they no longer have access to their
emotions and so now they're frozen out
they cannot make a decision because when
you're trying to you know think your way
through something we're relying on
a feeling an embodied feeling of one is
better than the other so
if it is impossible for us to move
forward without emotion and dangerous
to be unaware of our emotions how how do
we move forward
well it's it's not that complicated so
you bring up a good point um a lot of
people
have a misconception that rationality is
the ability to repress your emotions to
somehow subtract them from your
decision-making process and that is
exactly the wrong way to approach it
because
think of it in your own life if you meet
somebody who turns out to be very toxic
like a toxic narcissist
you're you're going to get a gut
reaction and emotional response from
them right this something's wrong with
this person and then that causes you to
start thinking about
maybe i shouldn't involve myself in a
partnership with this person maybe i
shouldn't get in a relationship so your
emotion will trigger a dangerous
response which was sort of the
reason why we have emotions a fear
response oh there's a lion hanging out
over there i better be you know aware of
it that emotion then triggers your kind
of awareness
so emotions are essential to the
rational process the problem is you have
no distance from your emotions you're
not able to take a step back and analyze
is this a rational response
is there really a lion over there well
you know i live in los angeles there's
probably not a lion over there it could
be a coyote or something right so i'm
able to step back and kind of analyze
the nature of the thread the nature of
what could be something exciting or not
so that's the dividing line you know
some i'm sorry that'll go away i was
like it sounded like it was coming from
my side i'm like i've never heard that
ring before in my life i should unplug
it
there's gonna be one more ring
hopefully it's telemarketing i'm just
getting inundated lately with
telemarketing
um
anyway
so
the ability to step back and analyze
your emotions and tell yourself
why am i feeling this way why am i angry
why am i excited
that is the key point that is what
divides people who are truly able to be
rational from those who can't be right
so
you have to train yourself it's not
natural to who we are because our nature
is to simply react right so
the ability to stand back and say no i
better wait maybe i should wait a couple
of days before i send it let's see how i
think tomorrow and then tomorrow shows
you that it was irrational that your
emotion wasn't really proportional to
the event so if your emotional reaction
is proportional to the threat or to the
opportunity
then
you know then there's a reason for it
but so often particularly in this hyper
social media environment where it's kind
of like we're all feeling constant rage
and anger
a lot of times it's not related to
anything real or is out of proportion to
the actual problem or threat
so you you don't try and repress your
emotions you can't write a book you
can't start a business you can't make a
decision about what you want to do
without the richness of emotions the
brain is an organic thing everything
works together so people who have had
that damage where they can't
feel the emotion that the emotions are
blocked and there are brain damage that
causes that
it's been shown that they can't make
rational decisions because they can't
decide they can't feel
what is what is good or what is bad what
is an opportunity what is dangerous
so you want your emotions you need them
you're not trying to repress them
repressing emotions will lead to other
problems what you want is just that tiny
little bit of distance that ability
when you're feeling it to go back and go
hmm
why am i really feeling this what are
the roots of it that's very powerful
ability that you can use that you can
develop through practice
just like exercise will develop your
muscles through being able to think
before you react it will slowly become
natural to you but you have to practice
it you have to be aware of that's the
source of your problem
do you have a method for how you
practice that
well
the main thing is to be aware of it
because
you know we're we're creatures that
definitely don't like anything kind of
painful we want our lives to be
pleasurable
we've had painful experiences in our
life generally in social situations i
maintain the most pain is psychological
it comes from
bad social interactions okay so you
don't want pain in your life obviously
everyone's going to answer that right
so you don't want to make bad decisions
you don't want to have your emotions
dragging you along and causing all kinds
of havoc
so if you understand that that's the
problem you're now motivated to then try
and tackle it so i could give you the
best techniques in the world but it
won't matter at all if you don't feel
that need for it that that hunger for
the ability to have a slight degree of
control over your own actions
i
practice meditation every morning
and um i i highly advocated it's i think
it's been one of the best things i've
ever done for myself i've been doing it
now for over 10 years it's like a ritual
and as you're meditating and you're
emptying your mind
suddenly emotions and things will start
welling up you don't even know from
where like anger and all those kind of
pissy stuff and things about your
parents and about all your bad
relationships etc
and now you're thinking
why am i thinking about that now
the sun is shining i'm trying to empty
my mind why is this garbage welling up
in me and you start to have some
distance and you start to see i try to
picture it like
my thoughts and my emotions they're out
there they're like two feet away from me
they're not inside my head they're over
there and i could watch my mind create
this little theater of all these little
problems and dramas
that's a beautiful thing
i catch myself now because i'm not
perfect i'm very human and i have the
same problems that i'm talking about but
i catch myself
maybe 50 percent of the time now
wow you're reacting here that emotional
idiot part of you that lizard part of
you is taking over and i can step back
so meditation is a very powerful tool
uh ryan holiday you know my good friend
friend of yours he has very much
advocated the use of journaling of
writing things down and i do that as
well so you can analyze yourself
but the main thing is you've got to
train yourself so in the course of a day
what i tell people is let's say tomorrow
something triggers an emotional response
and it happens every single day in our
lives right something somebody says
something somebody you read in the
newspaper or online triggers it
okay
practice this one thing just ask you one
thing tomorrow
try and do this one little step and go
back and go
okay
what am i feeling right now i'm feeling
anger all right okay first that's the
first step what am i actually feeling
all right
what is the cause of this anger all
right this person is saying something
that really really annoys me that really
gets my gets my goat etc okay
why what are the roots of that anger is
it something that i personally
experienced does it go back to my
childhood or is it just something that's
in the media sphere that's kind of
that i'm catching it's contagious from
what other people are getting angry
about
just try and do that one thing tomorrow
where you something happens and you step
back and you go through that process
what am i feeling
why am i feeling it what are the roots
of it and is it something that's real or
is it real and then if you just do that
once you'll it'll be very interesting
because you never do it
and then maybe you'll be inspired to try
it a second and a third time that's sort
of kind of the process that you can go
through
there's a one-two combo as i'm hearing
you explain that that um
i
worry about so one i don't know as you
were walking through that and you were
differentiating between is this
something from my past was this
something in the media sphere and i
thought oh dear god like do most people
actually have that layer of nuance uh in
in terms of being able to understand
themselves and then also
who when i think about how easily we
like i will put myself in this but how
easy all of us humans are swayed by
the media by other people like if
somebody knows more about a topic than
us it is all too easy to just be like oh
that must be true because we don't know
enough about it to question it and when
when we first started talking and you
said you know there's this one
exponential thing that we're not used to
and i thought for sure you were going to
say the rate at which information comes
out yes because that's the thing that's
really freaking me out is information is
coming at us so quickly it is very hard
to have the level of um
self-understanding that you're talking
about where even if you're willing to do
the work to turn inward and ask the
questions will you be able to
understand discern all of the different
things that could be influencing you
which i want to talk about childhood at
some point i've heard you talk about
that before we'll stay focused here for
now but like the number of things that
could be
influencing you that you may be totally
blind to
and then on top of that you've got
just so much data coming at you so fast
it feels hopeless to keep up with it all
yeah
well um you have to you know one thing
that happens to me that in my meditation
that's very interesting is i realize how
deeply i have been conditioned and that
how deeply we've all been conditioned
by what by
other people by what we hear by what we
read by the people who talk to us by our
environment by the culture that we're in
by the times that we're living
the separation from being conditioned is
what is truly my own thoughts
what comes from within me
now it's a very artificial dividing line
because
really none of my thoughts totally come
from me
i've inherited language that goes back
thousands of years i was conditioned by
my parents to respond a certain way
right and you know i've obviously a lot
of my ideas come from books that i've
read so not all of the the dividing line
between what's truly me and what's not
is is fluid but there is something that
you can say is me
it's like this is how i think this is
what my needs are this is where i am
right now
in december 2020. this is my reality
right
okay it's who you are it's what your
needs are and what your experience is
and then there's that artificial element
of
all the stuff that you mentioned that's
so blasting in our faces from our
culture at like you know light years
speed incredible speeds that are just
filling our brains with junk with
information that we don't need with
heated opinions that really aren't our
own opinions right
so
you have to be able first of all to be
able to turn that [__] off i'm sorry to
use that language here
you've got to be able to turn it off you
know
if you can't
you know take
breath breaks from social media from
your instagram account from facebook
from twitter then you're a prisoner of
it
you know just just admit it to yourself
i am a prisoner of social media i can't
control it it controls me
and they we talked earlier about
marketing
mark zuckerberg facebook
these people are masters at marketing
they know exactly how to put press all
of your buttons
they know that if they give an a topic
that's very controversial that's maybe
not necessarily true but is very heated
they'll get more views more likes more
posts more reposting etc they know how
to use certain colors to grab your eye
to grab your attention they know sounds
little beeping noises on your stupid
smartphone i like that word your stupid
smartphone that are going to like engage
you go whoa wow i better pay attention
they are manipulating you you are
conditioned you are a prisoner of social
media you are not in control of it
you're not you think you're the one
that's posting all these things that you
want to post about your life but really
you're not you're responding to what
everybody else is doing you're being a
conformist
if you really want to control it you
wouldn't have some distance you would
know
all right here's something that's really
affecting me as an individual that's
part of my life that i'm excited about i
want to share that with people and it
comes from instead of the need to get
attention instead of the need
to get people to like you instead of the
need to just bait your rage it's
something that like i want to express
a reality that i've discovered an idea
how many times is social media used for
the spreading of an actual idea that's
been rationally thought out well then
that if you're able to do that then you
are the one in control of this monster
this beast
and you can be you can use it for your
own purposes but just think about and
i'm not getting on a high horse here i
am as much guilty of this as anybody i
know how powerful it can be i know how
when i meditate i go whoa
where's that idea coming from robert you
have been conditioned
you've been brainwashed by the media
around you so i'm just as guilty as
anyone it's very difficult
you're submerged in it we're social
animals we're creatures of our culture
of our times it's not easy
but you have to be able to realize the
first step is to realize that you are
someone who's been conditioned just as
deeply as one of pavlov's dogs in those
experiments right
right so that idea of being conditioned
is um
it's something that
really
worries me in terms of beginning to
craft your identity so i think a lot
about sort of two things i think about
how do we help kids and make sure that
they're they don't have to go through
this huge unwinding process so that
their
mindset their belief system their
conditioning for lack of a better word
is actually moving them in a direction
that leads to a fulfilling life an
enjoyable life
and i think about how we unwind the
conditioning that you're talking about
whether it's from parents whether it's
from media or what have you
how do you think about that process and
we'll take the harder one for an adult
for somebody that realizes like
man having just gone through an election
cycle the the like
absolute sense of urgency with every
message at all like it's life and death
like ah pay attention and everybody's
like fighting and it really feels sort
of terrifyingly divided right now
and so thinking about okay people are
splitting into camps they're
conditioning themselves more and more be
team players think in the the right way
how can people begin to unwind that so
that we can be
more open-minded more mentally flexible
finding a way to
um
find a
common ground forward i'm not sure my
real question is around conditioning how
do we recognize it and how do we
recondition ourselves
well the process is always sort of the
same i'm going to sound kind of
monotonous in it but it comes down to
awareness
which is the key to all the things that
i talked about in the laws of human
nature
you know
so let's assume then that we go okay
cool i'm aware of the fact that this is
happening now how do i take control of
that process like are is it be careful
about the books you read be careful
about the tv shows you watch or is there
something beyond that
awareness will spark everything it means
all right now instead of reacting i'm
going to think and i'm going to study
okay and it's actually
you know we humans we want things to be
fun and pleasurable but trust me the
process of analyzing things instead of
reacting is one of the most fun
pleasurable
mental exercises you can ever go through
because now whenever i see a television
show whenever i see an outraged talking
head on television or whatever i'm going
hmm i'm studying their body language i'm
going what are the non-verbals they're
communicating where are their ideas
coming from is this something real
and stepping back and analyzing is
incredibly exciting and it's more
entertaining than just getting all
emotionally involved in it
so
if you know that you're conditioned if
you know that for instance
um and they've i think it was i can't
remember who it was that wrote an
article recently about how social media
and media in general is designed to hit
those anger buttons right
that's how they've been met that's how
they've been navigating these whole four
years of trump you know it's why their
ratings have been through the roof
so you know that's what they're doing
you know that's what's happening
now it's exciting to actually see how
they're doing it
wow i can okay i pressed on that button
that zuckerberg wants me to press on not
zuckerberg but the technicians there
okay why why did i do that robert why am
i getting sucked into that you know
i i recently
i in the you know because i say i'm
guilty of it myself
so you know i'm not a trump supporter
i'm on the other complete other side so
let's just get that out of the way
but um
uh so during when things were getting
really heated i guess about eight or
nine months ago i was starting posting
things that revealed that i don't like
trump right and then i would get in
these arguments with these people and
then and i was going god damn why am i
doing that
it's so pointless you're not going to
convince anybody of reality on a
facebook argument they're the most
meaningless things why are you doing it
robert and then i go through a process
of looking at myself and looking at how
i get sucked into that sphere
how easily facebook does that and how
you it's so easy to respond to the
emotions of other people
so
i'm telling you first okay i have been
conditioned
why am i thinking this way why do i hold
this opinion all right now i'm watching
something or i'm seeing something on
instagram or wherever that you wherever
you navigate and you find for a split
second you're getting that reaction that
you used to get
analyzing it is incredibly exciting and
self-empowering right
because it starts to show in what way
i'm not i can see why you as somebody
who really enjoys understanding why
people do what they do
that doesn't strike me as something
universal and when i think about okay
people are conditioned most of them are
blind to it and most of them unlike
robert greene are not going to enjoy the
process of unwinding that they are going
to enjoy the rage porn of it they do
want to get in screaming matches with
people they
i mean do they feel like it's a job well
done going on and yelling maybe but it's
like
when i think about
for something to to be
for you to say that it's better to you
know to really self-analyze it makes me
think you have a goal
what what is your goal maybe for your
life that might be the right place to
start like what to you is is a life well
lived in the context of you judging
doing the self-reflection and
understanding how the way the world
works becomes this exceedingly fun thing
for you
well
i mean you're asking really good
questions and i'm glad you're pressing
me on that i i like that
um but it comes down to what you want
with for yourself right so are you
somebody that's interested in actually
having power in this world are you
someone that's interested in being
successful in your venture in real life
define power for me most people think
it's a dirty word you've sort of made
your
your life around that
dirty word you've got a problem and
usually the people who think power is a
dirty word are the people who are the
most manipulative and passive aggressive
animals on this planet
because that's interesting we humans
naturally want power we want a degree of
control over our lives so imagine the
scenario where you can't control
anything about your children they just
run wild you can't influence them
you can't control any of the behavior of
your spouse that's irritating the [__]
out of you you can't control your
colleagues who are plotting all these
things you have no and your boss is
making you crazy you have no control
that's a recipe for incredible not only
misery but depression for turning into
all kinds of health problems returning
to drugs and alcohol for going off the
deep end by the time you're 40 right
so
you want power in your life power is
i have goals i have a fate i have a
destiny in life i want by the time i'm
40 to reach them
the ability to reach that to have
control over yourself and your and to a
degree of your emotions not repressing
them but some control
right will help you realize those goals
that is power power isn't like some
politician up there kind know weaving
all these machiavellian things to hurt
and destroy people that's the cliche
you've been watching house of cards for
too long i know nobody watches that
anymore but whatever the new show is so
that's not power power is the ability to
guide yourself in a through a very
dangerous world very competitive world
where every we're almost all having to
kind of
work for ourselves where we don't get
much help or cooperation from the world
we're thrown out of the university if we
go to college and here we're in this
world where there are no rule books
telling us how to navigate it
it's very complicated very difficult and
you make mistakes that you can suffer
for and power is knowledge is ideas is
understanding how to navigate a very
dangerous world okay so you want that to
get back on track to what i was saying
so you want that right you want to be
this is something that i talk about in
mastery the idea of wasting your
potential of never realizing your goals
of never being able to
to to create that business you wanted to
create or make that film that you think
is in you or start the business that
you're starting
tom you know
that's what you want in life and if you
don't want that there's nothing i can
say that'll help you right i'm starting
with the assumption that you want that
and i think most people do want that
okay
so your your rage you're you're
constantly being wasting time on the
internet you're constantly being effect
infected by the emotions of other people
is wiping away day by day second by
second all of your own power
right
because what is your power your power as
you tom is to be able to realize what
makes you different what makes you
unique
you had
i don't quite remember the full
trajectory of your career but i remember
you early on with the health company
that you had started and all this and
then you had a plan your plan is to
create this kind of emperor i'm not
trying to reveal your secrets here but
you have i'll reveal a way you have this
idea of creating a new kind of empire
sort of a new disney right and that
comes from something within i'm assuming
that there's something of the child in
you that wants that that you've wanted
that for a while that it represents
something that's unique about you it's
not something that comes from social
media or the people around you that
could
play a small role but it's mostly
something from within you it's you okay
and that's
you what makes you different or unique
is your source of power and the days you
spend getting angry about things that
aren't have nothing to do with your
day-to-day life they're where they're
corroding that uniqueness of you and
they're making you a conforming
pavlovian dog that's just like everybody
else out there in the world
if you look at the people who are truly
successful and powerful
see them as kind of models or icons to
reach
okay
it's not to say that we all have to be
incredibly successful to feel fulfilled
i'm not saying that i know people who
are really great carpenters who are
great at that and that's really
fulfilling and i know people who uh who
just want to be parents and that's their
life's task and it's tremendously
fulfilling but the people who are really
successful even at those things we can
say that they're that they're unique
that they're one of a kind but there's
nobody else like them and that is the
source of your power right so you want
that if you don't want that i can't help
you but if you do want that you're the
time you're wasting getting enraged and
being manipulated and feeling all these
things and just getting into that lizard
part of you is time you're wasting it
and your life is is a lot shorter than
you think it is
whoo
ending on a on a big one there um
before we get to mortality death all
that which i think is incredibly
powerful um i want to talk about
that the idea of carl young and the
shadow side
so
no i don't think there's anybody writing
today that speaks as eloquently as you
do about the shadow about the sort of
dark energy that we all have inside of
us that can be
extraordinarily powerful
and i know you well enough to know your
beliefs around this are nuanced but
listening to you as you were talking
there it's like you know don't get
sucked into rage you're going to be
wasting your life life shorter than you
think
um that is true but there's also an
element of
capture that rage my friend leverage
that rage point it at something that
makes sense
and this is where it gets incredibly
complicated because if you have a goal
and there's something that you want to
go after
letting
something piss you off can actually be
quite powerful and i talked to
my students in impact theory university
about this idea of having an animus
having something that that literally
animates you that you you can't live in
a world where that thing is true and
holding on to your anger enough to to
turn it into something usable so you're
not just flailing around reacting
freaking out but it's like hey i'm not
this is not okay i'm gonna fan the
flames of that not going to let them
burn me to death but i'm going to fan
the flames of that get angry and go do
something about it so how do you think
about that as you point out very aptly
that the the anger can cause you to
waste your life but also it's a tool how
do you help people reconcile that idea
well these are all great another great
question um
well you know i'm thinking back on on
myself and the anger that propelled me
to where i am today which
was largely my experiences in hollywood
and um just to tell that story very
briefly i worked in hollywood from like
the very late 80s into the mid 90s
and i saw a lot of very very
manipulative people
and a lot of hypocrisy
where it was
supposedly all about creating great art
making a film but really it was about
power it was about using people and
getting what you wanted out of and
getting more power than the other person
getting recognition and that was the
true subtext of what everybody motivated
most people in hollywood and man that
pissed me off the hypocrisy of that
pissed me off okay now
is that something that comes from is
that just sort of a superficial reaction
to me feeling like because i wasn't
successful was i just simply hurt
was it more like envy because i wasn't
very successful myself in hollywood to
be honest
or did it come from something deeper
and in analyzing it yes it came
something very deep
since i was a child
i've always been very very
sensitive to people's hypocrisy to
people pretending to be something that
they're not and i think a lot of
children are like that they're very they
have antennae for that
and it really angered me and then you
could ask yourself well why why does
that anger you
because
i feel like
you know it's like people pretending to
be something that they're not
you know
and you just have an inherent value that
that's a bad thing it's not just an
inherent value it's just that
we're all
flawed creatures and i
must have been aware since i was a child
that i am a flawed individual robert i
have dark emotions i can be kind of
bitter and aggressive and ambitious and
hurtful right i knew from very early on
of my own flaws
and it really irritated me that people
pretended to be something else
you know but they weren't
you know they weren't true to themselves
and you could i could see that in
children who were pretending to be the
little princess or the prince in their
family like they were perfect they were
really good and then i would see the
other side when we you know for mommy
and daddy they were all perfect but then
when we played i could see the little
nasty little rascal come out right
i hated that
you know okay we could go we could dig
deeper and deeper why did i hate that
but i think it came from something very
real about something about me
so
my
irritate my anger at hollywood wasn't
really i don't deny that there was an
element
of
you know i didn't get success so i feel
kind of envious because we all feel that
but i don't think that was the full
picture there was something very real
about it
and because i've been feeling it
throughout when i was a kid it was
feeling it throughout my 20s it was the
subject of all the short stories novels
and plays and screenplays i was trying
to write so it came from a very deep
real place
so when it came time to write my first
book the 48 laws of power beginning in
i had to draw on that anger you know and
if it had been something that wasn't
really me if it was something that like
was just a gimmick
i don't think it would have worked
so if your emotions don't come from
something that's very profound about who
you are about that dark side isn't
something that's you are it but it's
like a gimmick you're just pretending to
be angry and there are a lot of people
who do that or you're pretending to have
some other kind of emotion
we humans we can smell that we can sniff
out phoniness fairly well
but i felt it very deeply and i
disguised it in the 48 laws i channeled
it into a book where you never really
knew
that it was from hollywood and mike's i
never talked about myself
but you could feel the subtext of some
kind of a little bit of anger there
people's hypocrisy right
so
i took some an emotion that was
part of who i am
right and i used it
in very constructive channeled
productive way which is what i say about
the dark side
so
you know to get back to the to the
theory behind it
you know when you were a child
you were what i call like you were like
a round ball
a ball that had a front side and a dark
side that's not visible like the dark
side of the moon right
the front side was you're saintly you're
sweet you're nice and loving to your
parents you treat your sister and your
brother so well you get along with all
your friends but the dark side was wow
man i really hate that kid i'm gonna
pull her hair i'm going to mess his
homework i'm going to do all the things
that kids naturally do
because we have an animal nature we have
aggressive impulses this includes boys
and girls i'm not certain girls can be
just as as part of this as boys are
okay and then as you get older that
you're like cut your head that ball in
half
and you only prese that only it's not
only that you just present the good side
is that you kind of forget about that
other half and it drops away from you
and you just pretend to be this good
person
because you're socially motivated to
make people think that you're a nice
pleasant
socially aware person
and then that all that dark energy gets
repressed and repressed and repressed
but nothing ever goes away
that's the law of human psychology
things you felt when you were three or
four or five they don't go away they
just sit in you and they either sit in
you and stew and then explode when
you're 30 into some irrational behavior
or you're aware of it you're aware that
i feel this way you're aware that i feel
envy you're aware that you feel
aggression and anger you're aware that
you sometimes actually want to hurt
people okay you're aware that you're a
full human being and you're not a
[__] hypocrite like so many people
are out there i have a dark side it's
part of who i am all right
but don't you try to keep that in check
i mean it's not like what's your
prescription on that
is it like what does it mean to
integrate the shadow
it means uh we keep coming back to this
you know so i'm so boring here because i
keep repeating the same idea it means
you're aware of it right
but being aware that i'm angry or that i
have bitterness or whatever like
isn't it really the because what i'm
trying to figure out is
uh you and i react very differently to
the sort of [__] of hollywood's a
great example because now i as you have
exited i am now trying to enter and
because i am so hyper aware of how
people talk about hollywood i came in
and said look i'm just going to make my
reputation on i'm always going to tell
you where i'm at so when i see somebody
being fake full of [__] whatever because
i'm attuned enough to see it for the
most part i'm sure people pull some
things over on me but for the most part
i feel like i can sniff it out like you
were saying before
but i have
like almost a sadness that that's the
only tool that they've learned to
leverage
and
so i don't get the sort of anger towards
people that are manipulative or whatever
good that's fine but what's your point
so where i'm going is where how do you
get to the point where
now you're
not just being aware of it but you're
using it so it's
how how can somebody who's listening to
this
go
i am going to take my so you gave us the
example of how you channeled it into
your book but now just like in terms of
daily life i'm guessing when you see
somebody being fake you don't rage out
on them so you are restraining
so in in when i talk about integration
is it the awareness leads to just being
able to hold it back or is there like i
will use it if somebody's bullshitting
me and they're trying to be aggressive
to me then i just be aggressive back
and so there's an element i feel like i
can control it aggression anger are
tools in my tool belt and i pull them
out when i think they're appropriate
yeah
well that's good but you know you're are
you conscious are you aware that you're
doing that or are you just simply
reacting to people
are you able to i
that's certainly been an evolution so
they're able to use it in a somewhat
strategic
way so for instance there's somebody you
come across in hollywood who is a
manipulator and you can smell it but you
go if you like simply call them out on
it
you might create some problems for
yourself you might create a counter
reaction that will work against you are
you able to step back and go hmm i need
to be strategic with this [__] i need
to not just simply react i need to say
something that will either show him or
her this is what they're being like or i
need to take some kind of action that
will thwart them are you able to do that
or are you just simply getting angry in
response
it's uh
i'm very strategic but at the same time
i want
i want to feel good about who i am as i
walk away from that exchange so i don't
want to feel like i'm just bullshitting
people either
so normally i i put it into asking
questions about like what's your goal or
i'll even say like it feels like you're
angry with me or upset with me and i
don't understand why
um you know and if you can help me
understand i'm certainly not trying to
piss you off um and it has like i won't
say it
i i haven't been in it long enough to
know what the long-term repercussions of
my strategy are going to be
it's created awkward moments it has
certainly ended potential relationships
um
but i am
i'm constantly trying to think about who
i want to be in the exchange when i walk
away and what i want my long-term
reputation to be and that means having
the uncomfortable conversation up front
so that
what i say to you doesn't end up being
different than how i actually move if
that makes sense
but how is that your dark side
well so what i'm trying to figure out in
terms of the what what you mean by
integrating so i'm guessing it hey
here's what i do which is if somebody's
being aggressive towards me and it seems
like the right answer then i will
like let off like that little valve of
instead of repressing everything i will
let a little bit come out but i don't
know the only way that i
leverage my
shadow is as energy when i'm alone so i
don't know that i'm integrating it in an
intelligent way in these exchanges and
and i think that's part of what i'm
looking for is feedback on if there's a
way that i haven't got so here's how i
present it to people that
ask me and i say 80 of your time should
be in the light should be in the
beautiful things the wonderful things
you want to create optimism hope uh
compassion
20 of the time you're gonna lean on i
call it the dark energy the shadow side
where it is i for instance when i am
[__] exhausted to my core and i just
do not have energy to keep going
in those moments i think about the
people that want me to fail and i'm like
[__] them i am not going to let them be
right i am not going to let them see me
fail it is a dark ugly petty energy and
it's [__] intoxicating and it gets me
up and it gets me going and it keeps me
pushing your question right there you're
answering my question there's your
integration right there
you're taking an emotion that could be
destructive
if you acted on it in the wrong way and
you're using it as a way to motivate
yourself you you're not you're not
spewing this at people you're making it
sort of sharpen your own ambition your
own goals and go i better get up in the
morning and prove this idiot that
they're wrong about me you're not
hurting them but you're channeling it
into something productive so you just
answered your question that's very much
integrating it it's whether
your dark side is used for destructive
purposes i'm not advocating that you
hurt people i didn't go out and ever
name a single name of anybody in
hollywood ever did you could read my
book you'll never know that that's what
it was about right i didn't want to hurt
people i don't like you i don't like
hurting people it makes me feel ugly and
that ugly feeling ends up costing me
more than any kind of benefit i might
have gotten from venting it right i
don't want that
but so you're not actually trying to
hurt people you're using it to make
yourself more productive so for instance
you know you have a business you have
ambitions you have goals
and you use all the people who doubt you
like you're doing and you're going to
make that a motivating device that's
very powerful
let's say you're an artist and you've
had a lot of
your parents were really nasty to you
they were very abusive and you carry
that around with you and it's like this
500 pound rock on your your whole life
it's just pressing you down and now in
your in your play or your book or your
movie you let it out and you you you
don't say this is who they are but you
express it indirectly about very
manipulative people and you show your
kind of anger in a work of art and some
of the greatest works of art have an
underpinning of some kind of motivating
anger that's productive
let's say there's something that really
pisses you off in the world some form of
injustice whether that's sexism racism
whatever it is
instead of like just getting on facebook
and posting all kinds of stupid little
things and not getting anywhere you go
out and you decide i'm going to start a
movement i'm going to create some kind
of social movement that's going to
actually get something done i'm actually
going to contribute to society instead
of just venting and spewing
my own personal pet peeves you're taking
that dark energy and you're channeling
into something productive that's the
integration you're not using it to hurt
people you're using it to motivate you
to create something and the other thing
is we live in a culture that is so
politically correct where people are so
worried about if i use this pronoun am i
going to offend that person if i say
this am i going to lose my career we're
all so repressed that to see somebody
who expresses some of that of that
repressed emotion in their work
particularly in a work of art it's like
wow that's great it's an attraction it's
a form of charisma that we'll have
because you're less repressed than other
people so i'm trying to tell people that
dark side contains incredible creative
energy incredible motivating power like
you said when you get up in the morning
and use it don't be afraid of it but use
it does that kind of answer what what
your oh man powerfully no that's i
totally get that now
when you think about um
that sort of charisma that can be born
of that and you think about the pc
culture that we're living under now
what do you think about that like is is
this moment um crushing creativity is
this moment of filter for the people
that have the balls to speak up like
do you want to see us get on the other
side of this
how are you conceptualizing this moment
that i will say is
it's certainly unlike anything i've ever
seen in my lifetime now i don't you have
a much broader view of history to know
if we just constantly loop through
moments of this sort of pc madness or if
this is unique to this time
but
where do you come down well as somebody
who reads a lot of history um i tend to
oh never think that that a moment is
unique
because i've read about the moments like
this throughout history and i'm
definitely a believer in cycles that we
go through trends in culture that we
have this illusion that that we're just
progressing and evolving to some higher
place
and my conception of history is that it
goes around and around and around and
around uh
but round round
and so
there's cycles of incredible conformism
and we could say how often does it have
i i'm not i don't have a numerical
answer to that but there are periods of
incredible conformism where people are
all upset and there's like standards and
conventions and codes that become very
rigid
so
it's not like something new
we humans always have codes and
conventions of behavior because we don't
like anarchy we don't want people going
around saying whatever they feel like
and doing whatever they feel like we
always have codes and rules you can say
this you can't say that and the people
who rant against politically political
correctness are often very guilty of it
themselves because they have their own
conventions it's just that they don't
like your conventions they prefer their
own conventions and rules okay so it's
human nature to do that right
but there are moments of incredible
looseness
like the 1960s
and the incredible moments of very
rigidity like the 1950s it was a
reaction against all the conformity and
the codes and the mccarthyism and all
that kind of rigid stuff that was going
on in the eisenhower era right so these
things go in cycles
now i could be wrong it could be that
we're just going further and further and
further to some
incredibly puritanical
you know
era where
you just better say and do the right
thing or you're in trouble kind of like
1984 you know thought speak or whatever
it was called
um
thought control i forget the word
doublespeak and it was double speak yeah
okay you know so we could be going up in
that way i don't have a crystal ball i
can't say but my instinct is to say that
this will turn around
why because
we're creatures that
really actually love freedom it's
something i'm writing about a little bit
in my in my new book
it's that our brains
have incredible capacity to think
anything that's our a benefit of our
human brain and the deficit of it so we
can imagine anything we can imagine
unicorns we can imagine
you know
um
uh whatever it's called in in nevada
where they're space aliens we can
imagine all kinds of things that aren't
real there might be i'm not saying that
those aren't real but we can imagine
anything right
but we love that mental freedom and so a
repressive
puritanical pc culture is actually
counter to our nature and my feeling is
it's going to press down and down and
then it's going to explode and people
are going to be so tired of it that a
generation particularly a new generation
younger people because they're the ones
that are going to express this
this
enough of this already that it'll happen
because that's that's our spirit that we
actually love freedom and liberty and we
want our minds to be as free as our
bodies are free we want to be able to
express things
so
in that sense i would be a little bit
hopeful that there will be an incredible
reaction against all of the stuff that's
not to say some of it isn't legitimate
you know it's not to say that that there
that there is something real about the
racism that went on
in the course of american history it's
something very real and so to be aware
of that and to be aware of how it's
embedded in our culture in our language
etc is not a bad thing it's a very
positive thing
but sometimes
you know with some forms of identity
politics i'm not going to say which
forms because there are
good things about we all identify with
our tribe it's human nature but some of
it goes way too far you know because in
the end
i might be
get criticized this i might be
pollyannish but we're all huma we're all
part of the same race
that it doesn't matter things like race
are actually completely artificial
constructs we all come from the same
source in africa we all share the same
genes we all share the same dna all
forms of life come from the same source
so we're all in this together
and so a lot of this identity in
tribalism is very false
and very destructive and i just think at
some point
people are going to be so tired of it
because it's just so repressive
there's going to be an explosion
but as i said i'm not nostradamus so
you know i know sir damas but i know
that you're pretty well versed in
generational dynamics and the way that
generations move in these relatively
predictable cycles um and i've heard you
say that
preceding every crisis generation is the
revolutionary generation and there are
many people that have called millennials
the um the crisis generation
and if that's true then you've got gen z
coming up behind them as sort of the
natural torchbearers for the revolution
generation um when you say revolution do
you mean like literal overthrow the
government revolution or do you just
mean a cultural revolution like we saw
from the 50s to 60s it could be both
i have no problem with either one
whatever it feels real
you know um people who get all and i've
had people criticize my own videos about
this who get really upset about the idea
of a political revolution well i'm sorry
but the united states was formed by a
political revolution against you know a
monarchy right
and so
england had its own revolution the
french had their own revolution yes
they're destructive elements and and
they can go way too far but political
revolutions if they happen they happen
for a reason that the politics no longer
serve people's interests i'm not
necessarily advocating political
revolution but they happen and they
often can have in the long run
positive um effects you know they always
also be negative but also i'm talking
about cultural revolution it's not up
for me to decide i'm not 18 years old
right now i i'm an old
borderline boomer borderline gen x or
whatever you call it you know so i'm i'm
i'm a dinosaur do you do you feel like
old people should old depending on where
we draw that line but do you feel that
there is an age at which you reach that
you should sort of remove yourself from
that discourse well you shouldn't remove
yourself because you have experience you
have things to say and you have things
to teach people but you should just get
off your high horse and think of you
this this natural superiority that you
have to the younger generation and you
should get off the idea that you're
going to impose on them your own values
and your own judgments if young people
have certain desires and things that
they don't find are happening in the
culture around them
don't get your back up and be this kind
of reactionary person defending
everything from the past understand that
you were like that when you were in your
20s you wanted something that was more
ref you were interested in change you
were interested in new kind of fashions
and new ideas
right you've just lost touch with your
own younger self
right so it's not like you have to go
off and retire somewhere so that you
have to let young people give them some
space start creating a new world
but if i were 18 right now i would feel
a bit of anger and the anger would come
from
the boomers and the older generation
they've kind of dominated the world and
they have certain values in politics and
culture
that they feel kind of dead to me they
don't relate to to my experience they
don't relate to the the kind of digital
world that i've grown up in
i'm hungry for something that relates to
me
and my generation and and where i'm at
and so i'm going to use that to create
something new and different
and so that's where the gen z could be a
revolutionary generation it could happen
on the level of culture i also believe
it could happen on the level of politics
because our politics is pretty much
very static and very dead right now i
don't think it relates very well to
people's realities
so whatever that i don't think would be
a full bloodshed you know guns in the
streets revolution but some political
change would be healthy in a way so
it's more like
this world
doesn't fit me it doesn't fit who i am
and i know i had that feeling when i was
20. i'm walking into a world of my
parents who come from the world war ii
generation
and their values they don't fit me i
don't feel comfortable with them i'm not
comfortable with their music i'm not
comfortable with their
books that they read i'm not comfortable
with their values i want something
that's more myself and so you know you
have that agitating spirit and i think
that's a positive thing
because if in in nature and in in
culturally change is to me always a good
thing
and and some change could be negative
but in the overall macro picture change
is always positive because it's what
it's what we humans thrive on it's what
it's what drives all the innovation all
the changes that have been positive
throughout our our incredible evolution
so
like machiavelli because he's sort of my
one of my prophets
change is something that's extremely
healthy even in the moment it feels
wrong or painful or step back in the
long run it's always for the better for
the for for humanity
it's interesting um we'll have to go
farther in defining terms here before i
know if i agree with you so
when i think about
change for the sake of change i don't
think is um
it isn't always good so you're there are
going to be times where you go backwards
and people are not benefiting benefiting
from that
but
for a long time i was really hardcore
about the idea of i wanted to live
forever and i really started to think
about why has nature because there there
is at least jellyfish that are truly
eternal and in barring something violent
they will live forever
and what's interesting though is for
them to accomplish that feat what they
do is they grow and do a full-blown
jellyfish but then they collapse back
into like almost an embryonic mush and
then they grow back again so it's very
interesting that the strategy that's
deployed is to go again into something
that resembles sort of a neonatal state
and i thought is it possible that the
reason that nature has not favored one
thing living forever is that it
stagnates and that you just aren't
getting that fresh take whether it's
physiologically fresh right so it is not
the strongest of the species that
survive nor the most uh nor the most
intelligent but rather the most adaptive
to change is it that like you just
constantly iterate iterate iterate and
you basically have to kill the old so
that the new can come so i thought maybe
that's it like maybe the reason that it
would actually be problematic for one
person to live forever is that it is so
hard not to become dogmatic and i think
i do a good job like i hunger for change
i love change and but i will stop just
short of saying that i like change for
the sake of change i will say that
change as an entity if that's what you
mean like change as an entity must
always exist things that calcify into
dogma or ossify or you know whatever the
right word is turning to solid stone
that terrifies me and that that i i'm
sort of equally terrified i'm terrified
of chaos which is just change for the
sake of change and then i'm terrified of
ossification right so
where exactly that balance is so i'm a
little less
rushing towards a bloody political
revolution maybe than you
but i do like the friction well you know
to me
change is
on a higher level if you look at it from
a higher level is to me always for the
better
that on an evolutionary
scale talking about thousands hundreds
of thousands millions of years
that's where all
of the innovations the new species it's
how we emerged
as an animal as the most powerful animal
on the planet right and so and it's also
how what was the engine that drove all
of the civilizations and sciences and
the arts etc
so on a very high level to me it's
always positive and static is always a
negative right
but of course there are things from the
past
values that are that are positive that
are good that are worth holding on to so
i don't like black and white thinking
where it's either change
or
holding on to the past that there's no
kind of slight little fluid fluidity to
it all yes sometimes the change that you
want is a return to the past is a return
to the values so for instance if i were
looking at it politically
i would say the one american needs and
so i'm imposing my own values on this
and i'm aware of it is to return to its
own
core to the republic that we started in
the 18th century that is a little bit
outdated we're going to update it to the
21st century but at its core it had a
kind of participatory democratic
ideal that we've distanced ourselves
from
right it's can you can you say that
again in a different way
i'm not quite sure what you mean well
it's not such a representative democracy
so much anymore there are vested
interests there are powers that have
much more power than the single voter i
think if our founding fathers were
around right now they would be rather
aghast at the power
that you know certain
media companies have that certain
billionaires have over it right and so a
kind of return to sort of i'm just
throwing this out there i'm not saying
that this is
universally true it's just how i feel
but sometimes a return to the past
is actually the revolution that you want
okay but
there are things in the past i don't
want necessarily to get rid of their
values that are very good and human okay
but
so it's not just change for its own sake
but then i think a lot of what i what
comes to my mind
is adolescence and for instance my own
adolescence or the adolescence that many
of us went through
where
you're 15 and you're 16 years old and
you react against your parents
you don't want to be like them you kind
of find them you've spent your whole
life kind of admiring them suddenly
i don't know about that i i want
something else right and you you join
your your friends and you you have a
little tribe there and you're reacting
against your parents that is one of the
most essential
phases that any young person could go
through if you don't go through that
rebellious phase from your parents
you're never able to
establish your own identity right but
some of that reaction is childish is
stupid right you're just trying to be
the opposite of your parent it's not
very rational okay
but
on the higher level it's actually
incredibly valuable because you're
carving out your own space you're
carving out who you want to be and
that's a positive thing
so if young people are reacting against
the world of the boomers and they want
something politically or culturally
that's different some of it to me might
strike me as foolish and stupid and
anarchic but on a higher level i go it's
for the better because people we need we
need change we need new ideas we need
constantly new values it's like water
that has to keep moving otherwise it
stagnates and it gets unhealthy and all
kinds of bacteria start festering the
water needs to be constantly circulating
to be sort of a healthy
a healthy environment and so culturally
we need that constant circulation it's
not change to me what i want is a
culture that's dynamic
i want dynamism i want the ability for a
change to happen i want the ability for
people not to be afraid and to be
constantly recycling and going through
this process again and again and again
to me that's that's the healthy aspect
and i talk a lot about it in my books i
contrasted in the 48 laws of power
the paradigm of athens
perhaps one of the most creative dynamic
cultures ever in the history of humanity
what we look back to is a golden age
and i contrast it with sparta its arch
enemy this incredibly rigid militaristic
society that one didn't want any change
and for hundreds of years managed to
keep out any kind of change in system
whereas the athenians were all very
fluid they were merchants they were
making money they had all the arts and
to me you know that is sort of the ideal
that we all want to return to and sparta
is what we want to avoid
that's really interesting um talk to me
about what made that a golden age i know
that you're incredibly well versed in
the classics
and i've heard few people talk about
um some of those things in as
interesting a way as you do
not the least of which was your take on
athena and strategy and um
yeah some very very interesting ideas so
what what is it about that period that
makes it something to sort of look at
fondly what how did they keep that
circulation going in a useful way well
it didn't last very long it really only
lasted for about 100 years even even
less
so it was kind of this fleeting moment
but sometimes those fleeting moments are
the richest in history the renaissance
didn't really last that long either
but um
well it started from
um you know this is the first true
democracy in in the history of there
were signs of it in other cultures i
don't deny it there were little sparks
of it but this was the first true
democratic culture and to take that step
was incredibly brave and incredibly
dangerous
so
was there one particular ruler that had
to give up power for that
no
what happened was they had a system
that was democratic but people were kind
of taking advantage of it
and so i talked about in in human nature
the kind of role of pericles to sort of
realign athens back to back to its roots
back to its democratic roots where it
wasn't the oligarchs where the wealthy
people weren't exercising
uh power disproportionate power
but
you know so athens came out of this
situation where they were
they were started off as a commercial
entity their power was commerce because
they were a seafaring nature and so
sparta its arch enemy was landlocked
right so they had a land very kind
that's why they were so rigid
militaristically they had to control
everything but the sea is this kind of
fluid environment where you know it's
very dangerous
you have to take a risk to go on the sea
there's no risk marching out from sparta
and crushing your enemy in a land battle
but going out to sea is inherently risky
so the athenians were by nature risk
takers and i'm always personally very
attracted to people who aren't afraid of
risk
so they slowly built this kind of
merchant commercial
empire
you know in in the in the early 5th
century bc
and and so people other cultures began
to fear them began to fear them as a
rising power particularly the persians
and twice the persians mounted these
vast mass armies with xerxes the second
time to crush this empire completely
destroy it wipe it off the face of the
planet which would have completely
altered his the evol you know our own
history right
and it was the odds were incredibly in
their favor and this little tiny
city-state
with a much smaller population they were
able to defeat this mighty mighty army
and so
out of that there was a tremendous fee
rush of patriotism
look with who we are look at what we did
and the temptation in that moment would
be to get conservative to be to become
all kind of
we need to hold on to what we're doing
we need to hold on to our empire we need
to you know
build to sort of stay where we are and
instead they've doubled down on their
democratic routes and they created this
incredibly dynamic culture
that in which
um power was constantly changing hands
and um
you know the explosion culturally was
insane the theater
the the visual arts
architecture etc and the sciences it's
what we all admire what we want but the
idea of being able to change and to be
able to embrace risk and to not be
afraid of a kind of an archiculture
because it was anarchic
so
they had things like
they had this thing called the ostrocon
which where our word ostracism comes
from
and every year you could vote to have
one person banished from athens
first what's the person that you hated
the most and the word came from a piece
of ceramic called an austracon
and you would vote for who was that one
person you hated the most and wanted to
get rid of in athens and everybody voted
and the person who got the most votes
was thrown out of athens right
even if
nobody ever got more than seven votes or
was there some sort of minimum there
would always be someone who would get
thousands of votes the most irritating
demagogue in the culture right wow i had
no idea yeah
that's where our word ostracism comes
from
and um sometimes it was good and
sometimes it wasn't so good because
there would be rabble rousers who would
who would say we got to get rid of this
person and then get rid of them for all
the wrong reasons but mostly it was this
vent for the for the populace to say who
they thought was dangerous and that we
could get rid of him and it was
incredibly populous it was incredible
you know the people had
of course we're talking about males so
it's all relative women weren't voting
and and slaves weren't voting i know i
got to qualify all that that's true but
for the time it was incredibly
revolutionary the amount of power that
the people had in athens was remarkable
and so they they weren't afraid of that
of course it all collapsed
with the peloponnesian war and so this
fleeting golden moment was very
short-lived but it was no i know nothing
about that so what what ultimately
brings it down just weak military well
no no um
so
pericles
so sparta is trying to initiate a war
against its rival athens are going to
destroy it
and pericles i talked about this in the
first chapter of the laws excuse me of
human nature pericles comes up with a
strategy for how to defeat the spartans
we're not going to fight them on land
we're going to defeat them with our navy
and he ends up
dying from the plague that hits athens
in that year i think it's 429 426 bc
something like that
and then everything kind of goes berserk
because he's gone and the athenians kind
of go insane that's why i use it as the
paradigm of irrationality and they
decide to get arrogant and hubristic and
they think we're actually going to crush
sparta now instead of just trying to
defend ourselves we're going to turn
around and we're going to crush them and
get rid of them we're going to invade
this town of syracuse which is on the
island of sicilia now on the island of
sicily which was a major
ally of sparta and if we destroy them
we've destroyed one of sparta's allies
in there and they're going to fall
they're going to sue for peace
they end up in
launching this enormous all of their
wealth and all of their ships go into to
this invasion of syracuse and it's a
disaster and they're humiliated and
they're defeated and it's pure hubris
and sparta is now has the upper hand and
in the course of a few years they
completely crush athens they take it
over and the democracy is essentially
finished by about 404 bc
and if you ever want to read one of the
greatest books ever written it's the
history of the peloponnesian war by
thucydides the ancient greek writer it's
amazing one of the most amazing
documents you can't believe that this is
something that you're reading from the
fifth century bc it is so modern and his
way of thinking is so beautiful and he
kind of chronicles the rise and fall of
athens in a very kind of
iconic way
and
what were his key insights that it was
hubris and and that is sort of the
what really took them down or
yes more or less they kind of lost a
sense of their ideals
and they they got drunk with the idea of
empire
as opposed to preserving their democracy
they began they became drunk on power
and they thought that they could assert
themselves all over the mediterranean
and kind of rule by force instead of by
persuasion and they kind of got
distanced from their own values and
generations of dem it's very kind of
oddly um
similar to what we're going through
where a series of demagogues
and
and populists rose to the top and kind
of perverted the values of athens and
led to its its destruction so it's it's
this incredible parable
of what can happen to any civilization
so yeah
all right if i were watching this
interview back i know i punched myself
in the mouth if i didn't go back to this
idea of anarchy and there being elements
of that that are good
tell me more i i have always had a
default assumption i will admit i have
never thought about anarchy as having
anything positive to offer so i'm
open-minded
bring me in tell me why anarchy is is
has elements that may be used it's not
anarchy per se it's it's it's change i
mean
so
let's go through an example that i know
very well which is the french revolution
something that i've studied a lot and
i'm very it excites me for some reason
and here you have
a monarchy in france that has existed
for
at the time 700 years
very static
in control of france
by the time we arrived in the 18th
century it's kind of ossified into this
very silly culture with marie antoinette
and and louis xvi with these silly
rituals and these courtiers and
everything and and the populace is
suffering from famines
and you know they're going they're
starving to death and this incredible
inequalities of wealth and it's
basically a dead culture
and then slowly the fans of revolution
start
churning beginning in the early 1780s
there's some revolts against the famine
etc and against the king and then it
explodes in 1789
right and you know we're all more less
aware of what kind of ensued with the
guillotine and the terror and how it
goes way too far and it turns into
something a bloody nightmare you know
okay and then
after the after that falls apart the
napoleon kind of rises to the top and
he's sort of part of the french
revolution and then he slowly turns it
into something very conservative etc on
and on and on but the argument that most
people have is
you know the french revolution all that
bloodshed what good what what was it for
you know why that kind of anarchy as you
might put it what did it lead to what
good was it
well it led to the formation of what
became modern europe it led to the
decline of all monarchies it became an
ideal it showed the people of europe
there is another way of being there's
another way we don't have to live in
these incredibly rigid cultures
that that that were pretty ossified like
in the austrian hungarian empire
etc and or in spain that the ideal of
revolution which spread to south america
which spread you know of course saw some
of it was from the united from our own
revolution which preceded the french
revolution
but
other people have shown that the
conditions
before the revolution were actually a
lot worse the people there were many
more deaths and executions and suffering
than after the french revolution so
it was bloody it went too far
it created a reaction but in the long
run
decades later it had a very positive
impact because it broke up this
incredibly rigid system that had a
strangling europe was strangling it
culturally economically and politically
so that's an example of change that at
the moment looks negative and bloody and
anarchic and unruly but in the end
created a very positive effect i'm not
saying that happens all the time it's
not a law but
oftentimes what seems to be anarchic and
ugly and awful in the moment does end up
serving a higher purpose because we need
dynamism in our culture we need change
so
because that sounds so horrendous
because all of us only have one life to
live and if you're the one living
through the guillotine
and like i've heard stories about how
absurd it got where it had that sort of
um was it in world war ii where people
were like clapping oh no it was i think
it was in china where people are like so
terrified to stop clapping for um i
think it was mao that you know they'd be
there for like two hours like just
clapping clapping clapping clapping
clapping and because you could get
ostracized or killed if you were you
know considered the first one to stop
clapping or i've read the gulag
archipelago and like the nightmare that
it would be to live through that moment
and i get it from a macro perspective
it's like we want that change so robert
greene is going to tell us how to do
revolution the right way
please tell me what i meant so the
russian revolution began
with that where it began with these sort
of peasant rebellions but from the
beginning the bolshevik revolution was
an incredibly conservative movement it
was not a revolutionary movement it was
a movement about amassing power for the
state
for lenin and the state and stalin it
was a very repressive machine from the
beginning so it's not at all what i'm
talking about and the chinese revolution
is very obviously incredibly interesting
story because mao began with this idea
of like the trotsky idea of a permanent
revolution we're going to have a culture
that's constantly changing etc etc and
then it turned into this incredibly
rigid conservative ossified culture and
i wrote about in the laws of human
nature the cultural revolution in the
60s in which he wanted to completely
turn things upside down like what i'm
talking about so here i'm going to
contradict myself here i'm going to show
my own here i'm wrong robert's wrong
here was a chance he wanted to turn
everything upside down and it became a
nightmare and it turned into massive
conformity like what you're talking
about where you better keep clapping or
if you stop right it turned into a
nightmare
so
that kind of just change for its own
sake can lead to something very
destructive i don't deny that and and
look what happened to china afterward
after a moment like that they turned
extremely conservative and rigid in the
late 70s and it's something that still
affected them to this day so
you know history is not like a
this logical
little thing like science or physics
where these things all happen the same
way i can pull up examples of change
that lead to something very negative i
understand i agree and there are
exceptions to what i'm talking about
in the long run in the higher picture
from looking from above i'm more worried
about cultures that are rigid that are
ossified that cannot change that don't
have that kind of constant churning of
the waters and it's not just culture
or or politics it's also business it's
also technology it's also the ability to
innovate you know
social media was a great thing
with the 90s and the early aughts we
were all so excited about it kind of the
freedom of it the ability to communicate
with anybody and it's turned into this
kind of rigid megalith you know like
dinosaurs
chomping around these giant
brontosauruses that now dominate the
landscape and nothing else can thrive
right
so that's kind of the dynamic where
having something it's not good for us we
want that we're the country the country
that
that sparks all of the innovation
because that's what america is we're a
country of change that's why europe
admired us we weren't hold we weren't
beholden to the past we were willing to
take risks and create new kinds of
businesses etc
so do you worry at all that we're moving
to with the pc culture with cancel
culture all that that we're moving
closer to something like you better not
stop clapping very much so very much so
so you know and this is the way of all
cultures so we started off with a kind
of a pioneer spirit
where you know it's it's
the rugged individual
and it's a kind of a culture where
people can kind of be different and
express who they were and even in the
19th century in a time very different
from our own
where you know there were some kind of
rigid codes of how to behave there was
incredible freedom going on when you
look about at some of the weird kind of
um
cults that were forming the the kind of
utopian societies and some of the
writers and some of the things that were
going on it was a and even the business
environment which was very cutthroat
with the robber barons
it was incredibly
dynamic period of time where where we
celebrated the entrepreneur and we
celebrated people kind of creating their
own
you you could you know the rags to
riches myth that is so much a part of
america
and we've really you called it the rags
to riches myth
yeah
well tell me more why is it a myth
well
it's not a myth in the sense that it's
wrong because myth is mis interpreted
nowadays to mean false
it just means it was part of our culture
just like athena
and and zeus was part of the greek myths
that people believed in it was an ideal
maybe that's the better word than myth
but it was part of what
held up
all americans could reach for that ideal
whereas in europe you couldn't you know
sort of thing so maybe myth was the
wrong word
but um
you know and so
the reason i've written about this
before and talked about it before but
the reason that was there that that
started was
we it was a culture that was hungry
that we were we we we felt
um we felt that there were risks out
there that if we didn't do this that
america was going to suffer something
that we we felt
compelled to create new things
right
and you look at it in the arts and the
sciences in technology it was incredibly
vibrant
and then you can kind of watch it slowly
slowly slowly get get snuffed out that
spirit's kind of dying on the vine
then kennedy in 1960 he saw what was
happening particularly in the eisenhower
era and he wanted to get back to that
what he called pioneer spirit and he
launched
what he called the new frontier which is
part of the space race and
you know and the space race was what
created the internet if it wasn't for
nasa we wouldn't have the internet and
the space race generated
i can't tell you how much of the
technological innovation that that
powers everything nowadays
so
yeah we're very much straying from that
spirit with with the cancel culture and
everything like that you know so we're
afraid of people with different opinions
we're afraid of
of things that threaten our own
preconceived ideas
and
that kind of to me runs counter to some
of the spirit of our country it's not
we're not we've never completely lived
up to our ideals but that is the ideal
that i think
drove us for so many
generations
yeah one thing i find just incredibly
sexy is the idea of rugged individualism
that's something that you know i'm i'm
with you stagnation is bad change can be
extraordinarily good change as a general
element is incredibly important
but when i think about the way things
are going now where it's group identity
over everything that really worries me
and ultimately i think a group is only
strong when the individual people
are focused on like how strong can i
become how much weight can i carry for
the group and then the broader we make
the group i think the better off
everybody is but if you're not first
leaning into like hey this is my sort of
one shot at things i'm going to see how
strong i can get i'm going to see how
far i can push myself i'm going to think
for myself act for myself
that to me is where one you just get
strong mental health because people are
chasing fulfillment they're pursuing
things that fill them up in a way that
maybe nobody else gives a [__] about but
like they care about and they have the
ability to pursue that
and then you marry it to an idea that we
flirted with at the beginning that i
think now is the time to talk about
which is mortality man like you've got
precious little time on this planet and
are you doing something that you think
is rad you know regardless of whether
other people are telling you that that's
what you should do like is is it
something that fills you up
how do you so i know
you've talked in other podcasts about
your book so i don't think i'm talking
out of school to say that you're working
on a book loosely titled or maybe
officially titled the law of the sublime
and how that relates to mortality and
the stroke that you had tell me more
about how do you think about the fact
that this is all finite how does that
tie in because when i think of sublime i
think of something so beautiful as to
you know it's fleeting it's beautiful
and almost painful in its beauty right
is that close to how you think of it or
is it there you think about it it's very
wise it's very intuitive of you because
the thing about the sublime that i'm
trying to
capture the essence of in the book
is that it's a mix of pain and pleasure
and that's what makes it so powerful
so the that's really interesting so the
idea of our mortality is obviously very
painful right what could be more painful
but the idea of transforming that into
something beautiful into something
enlightening into something that kind of
fills us with a much different spirit
which which motivates us to get
something done which makes us appreciate
what we can look at we're alive and the
sky is blue and you know and all that
so mortality has this ability to sharpen
our senses to sharpen our appreciation
of life and that turns the pain into
pleasure
but the pain and pleasure always go
together so underneath that kind of
ecstatic feeling that you feel when
you're aware that that you know there's
eternal time and that there are all
these insanely wonderful things about
around the world is always going to be
mixed with that tincture of pain about
how i'm going to be gone and i won't be
here to appreciate it but that mix of
the two emotions of what makes it so
powerful and so insanely addictive
right
because pure pleasure on its own can
almost get monotonous and it can almost
go ah i'm tired of it you know
i'm bored and pure pain
but the combination of these two things
and so in my book i'm talking about how
every element of the sublime has the mix
of those emotions and why neurologically
that is such a powerful thing to us so
you know people who've had ecstatic
experiences what maslow the great
psychologist called peak experiences
let's say
one of the paradigms for me is climbing
a mountain
right climbing mount everest or the guy
who wrote that great book
about touching the void
simpson you know people who've had those
kind of mountaineering experiences
to get there whoa what pain man how
awful you can't breathe you could die at
any minute there could be an avalanche
but you're so excited you're so happy
because you're alive and you're tested
you're testing your limits this is known
as the dynamical sublime but you're
testing your human endurance against the
forces of nature and then you reach the
top and you have this insane view
that's like the paradigm of the mix of
these two emotions now that might all
sound kind of pointy toy to something
very rare in life you know i'm not going
to climb my mountain i'm not going to
feel that way about death but i'm trying
to bring it down to everyday things in
your life so that the sublime is not
just these rare moments where you climb
a mountain
or whatever it is but it's in your
everyday consciousness right that's the
goal that i have because i think what
people are missing nowadays is they
don't have a sense of awe and a sense of
enchantment about the world around them
they feel everything is kind of dead and
everything is sort of the same
but the actual truth of it is is that
this world is so unlikely that you and i
tom bilia are talking right now over
skype about these very issues
5 000 years ago who could ever it's
impossible it's insane it's a dream
it's like it's not even real it's like
the matrix who could even begin to
believe it every moment of your life is
like that but you're not [__] aware
of it you're so wrapped in banality that
you're not aware of the insane
awesomeness so my first chapter which i
finally finished was so difficult
was about the cosmos and about the big
bang and about the universe and about
the origin of stars and how the moon
came from the earth
um about four and a half billion years
ago collided with this other mars-sized
planet called thea it was this giant
collision and the pieces of dust from
that collision started spitting around
the earth and by gravity kind of
collected it became the moon
and wow the moon is just like this dust
that came from earth
right and then in the beginning it was
like
much
like a third two thirds closer to earth
than it was now it was like this thing
that was right there in your face
you know to see
the origin of the moon and to realize
that that is unbelievable and that the
moon that i'm looking at now you don't
have to climb out everest you can go out
now and even in the daytime you can see
the moon
that's the same moon that people in
ancient babylonia were looking at and so
you're having the same experience that
they're having you know you can time
travel and do a lot of time traveling in
this book where you can experience what
it was like
five thousand years ago
one million years ago you can travel
through through art the internet is the
most sublime thing ever invented
now i'm writing this book i have one
little question about a dinosaur that
i'm wondering about and how it how it
survived
i do three little little clicks on my
computer and whoa i've got all the
answers of all these experiments it's
insane
it's insane the world we live in it is
so insanely beautiful and sublime you're
just not aware of it you know
so
i don't know if i'm answering your
question i'm going off the deep end here
but that's good no you you are and in
your words and in the way that you're
saying your words which is really
interesting and
um
i think that putting it in context of
what you've been going through in the
last two years helps and what i love is
that knowing that you had a stroke
knowing that you were in a coma and i
mean that's about as near death as
anybody is going to get
knowing that you've struggled and you
know i know that you've said that you
thought you'd be farther along in your
healing than you are now
and then one final piece to the puzzle
which made what you just said so
powerful is that i know that as a writer
you normally write the thing that you
need so the fact that you're turning
towards the beauty and the sublime um
would it be accurate to say that that
this has been part of how you've
reconnected to
joy and
wonderment as you've gone through sort
of this incredibly difficult period yeah
it's probably what's keeping me alive
right now to be honest with you because
it really fills me with because it's
been very frustrating dealing with what
i mean i'm not complaining there are
people dealing with a lot worse in this
world people with the with coronavirus
etc but it's been very frustrating not
being able to take a walk not being able
to hike not being able to open things
not being able to type just little
frustrations but this it's weird because
the book when i originally had the idea
for the sublime book
about 15 years ago i was gonna write it
and then i got sidetracked
by the 50 cent project and then i got
sidetracked by mastering human nature
and i'm coming back to it
but when excuse me when i had the
original idea
i was going to travel to all parts of
the world and i was going to see all
these weird sublime landscapes in
argentina i was going to go to
antarctica i was going to go dive and be
with the dolphins and the sharks and
these waters i was going to have all
these insane experiences and write about
them
okay now the irony is i'm doing the book
and i can't i can't even walk outside my
house
right
so my life is so limited that i have to
find that now in my head but it's an
advantage talking about turning [__]
into sugar that's that's how i'm turning
that [__] into sugar because
it's the limitation is i have to use my
own brain to experience it but for
people out there who are trapped in a
bad job who can't voyage to antarctica
or argentina etc i'm trying to make the
book something that's going to relate to
you just like me if you feel trapped or
you feel limited you can explore you can
do all these things sitting at home and
expand your mind and feel it and give
yourself a greater
sense of excitement about even the
weirdness of just being alive right now
so
that horrible disadvantage that i've had
where i can't do the book that i wanted
is actually the best thing that could
have ever happened to me i think in the
end as far as how the book will
eventually come out
framing is everything
robert thank you so much man i enjoy
every second that i ever get to spend
with you i'm super excited about your
new book where can people engage with
you in the meantime
well um my my old website is still there
i'm i i gotta ge i gotta get my social
media a little better i i don't deny
that talking about change
so my old site is
powerseductionandwar.com the and is
spelled out and there you have links to
all my other books and they have links
to my instagram
my twitter and my facebook accounts
um and there's an email address where
you can write to me but i if i get the
time and i can get the energy going i am
trying to kind of
i also have a youtube channel that's
that's new where i'm doing a series of
podcasts
so you can go visit that there's a link
to that on my website
but eventually the next time we speak
i'll have a much more
modern up-to-date
real real looking social media presence
because right now it's kind of well
what's wrong with that guy
well i look forward to it
uh dude thank you again this is a lot of
fun i really really do enjoy hanging out
with you
guys dive into his world if you haven't
already read his books they are
absolutely extraordinary and by the way
we also have multiple episodes we've
shot together i highly encourage you
guys to go watch those they are amazing
i've watched the episodes on his own
youtube channel they are fantastic so be
sure to check those out and speaking of
something that's fantastic if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
[Music]
so
you